Once around, Taiko's supernova.
So, Tao supernova is located in the
constellation of Cassiopia, that W or
Mshaped constellation in the northern
hemisphere, and the red arrow is marking
the approximate spot inside that red
ring where it can be found. Although, it
is jolly faint and difficult for an
amateur telescope to be able to see
anything.
Tao himself marked the position using
this map here in his publication Denova
Stellar and you can see that it's
labeled I and says Nova stellar on the
map there. So, Tao, fantastic observer
back in pre-T telescopic times and uh
was not the only person to see this, but
one of the main people to make a uh
public statement about it and to track
it in great detail.
The first thing that it really drew to
everyone's attention and again we got a
modern map of Cassiopia with SN 1572
with the little star symbol there
supernova 1572 the year of its
discovery.
What it revealed was that the fixed
stars, all the ordinary stars that
seemed to be in the night sky month
after month, year after year, were not
unchanging and permanent features and
that things could happen. And this was
contrary to uh ancient received wisdom,
the ideas of Aristotle and others who
had not noticed any changes in the night
sky at all.
So thinking that the stars were fixed
and permanent forever.
Now Tao was very diligent in measuring
the brightness and estimating it by eye
and with various bits of apparatus
uh and produced a light curve. And we
have a modern rendition of the light
curve here of a typical supernova decay
curve showing how the brightness drops
away.
It was originally seen by a number of
observers starting around about the 2nd
of November. I think Tao got involved a
few days later. And at the time it was
described as being brighter than Jupiter
at its peak with a magnitude of -4.0.
You can see that in the blue dot at the
top left of the graph there. Tao himself
described it as brighter than Venus and
Venus would indeed have been around
about -4 at that point as well uh in a
different part of the sky. Um it's often
difficult to compare things from one
part of the sky to another. You get
different background lighting conditions
and different uh amounts of obscuration
due to the Earth's atmosphere. But
nevertheless, very bright indeed.
Jupiter would have been around magnitude
minus2 at the time.
So this new star erupted, was seen for
many months and tracked all the way down
until it fell below magnitude 6 at the
limit of naked eye observations. And
remember this is uh some 40 years before
the telescope was around. So nobody had
any uh way of seeing it once it had
faded below that cutff level.
But the question really was with modern
instruments,
can we find the remnant? When we look at
a number of places in the night sky,
such as the Crab Nebula, we see the
expanding shock wave of glowing material
that originated from the supernova. In
that case, supernova of 1054 AD. But in
this case, for very many years, nobody
could find anything. And we're talking
right up through the first half of last
century.
The first clue was actually from the
Jodral Bank radio telescope. Robert
Hanbury Brown and Sirill Hazard made a
detection in the 158.5 megahertz band in
the right part of the sky picking up
radio waves coming in from that region.
Now back in the day it was very
difficult with single radio telescopes
and long wavelengths of this nature to
be accurate about where the waves were
coming from. We can only do that now
because we have intererometers where we
link multiple radio dishes across the
size of entire states or countries or
even the whole world. And as you do
that, the uh resolution, angular
resolution, so the position on the sky
that you can pin things down to becomes
phenomenal. But with a single dish, it's
really rather limited.
the 2C and 3C surveys, the second
Cambridge radio survey and the third
Cambridge radio survey
using the telescope that you see on the
right in the black and white photo
there. Uh no longer ex in existence,
this one um and uh moved from the
original location where there's now a
sports ground to the Mard Radio
Telescope Observatory down at Lord's
Bridge. So both the 2C and 3C surveys
were at the old site. And
in the second survey, a source called
2C34
was found in roughly the right area of
the sky. And then 3C, the third survey
with a new instrument was able to pin it
down more accurately. And again, it
seemed to be in the part of the sky
where Tao's supernova had gone off.
The next clue came from X-rays from the
Uhura X-ray Observatory seen in the lab
on the right here with its uh very long
X-ray telescope. You need a long
telescope to use the grazing incidence
uh method of uh getting some sort of
pointing out of the the detection so
that the X-rays can be funneled into a
sensor uh and you know where they've
come from. They have a tendency to be
very hard to trap. Um anyway, so Ohura
detected the source which they called
Sephius X1. X1 for the first X-ray
source, Sephius for the constellation of
Sephius the king. But actually the
source was next door in the
constellation of Cassiopia and it aligns
with Tao's supernova of 1572.
Um actually that is right on the border
between the two constellations. So uh
given the limited resolution of these
early instruments not surprising that it
was difficult to spot. And finally in
1960s
the optical telescopes caught up and a
very faint ring-shaped smudge was found
the nebula itself first by the large
telescopes at Paloma. They've really
changed the whole basis of uh visual and
photographic astronomy made a huge step
forward and then various satellites were
able to get in and the act as well
including the ROSAT satellite.
Nowadays we have images like this
showing it roughly spherical in shape uh
with a very fluffy greenish yellow
center obviously a uh purple colored
ring around it somewhat irregular which
is the shock wave of the expanding
material still moving outwards. Now,
with nebula in general, whe what whether
they're emission nebula, reflection
nebula, planetary nebula, supernova
remnants,
they're quite difficult to pin down the
distance because it's rather hard to get
a hard focus on something and use
methods like parallax and so forth. Uh,
but we think this is 8,000 to nearly
10,000 light years away from us.
What we can see though is that shock
wave moving outwards 4,000 to 5,000
kilometers per second. That's a very
rapid movement. The Earth going around
the Sun's pretty quick, but that's only
doing 18 kilometers per second. So 4 to
5,000 is a very rapid movement indeed.
Um, and this is what you'd expect from a
rapidly expanding shock front from such
a huge detonation.
X-ray telescope Chandra has got in on
the act here and had a good look into
the uh expanding shell and found a lot
of dense clumps. And these are hot spots
where the shock wave has overtaken and
run over lumps of existing denser
matter. Could those be small clouds of
material ejected earlier? They could be
planets. They could even be small stars
or brown dwarf companions. Um I wouldn't
give much for their chances against such
a violent uh expansion uh of a shock
wave like this.
The Fermy gammaray telescope has had a
look and detected
high energy gamma rays. So, we have the
visible and infrared image there with
the purple
uh pixelated square overlay of the gamma
ray sources offset towards one side
somewhat. You can see it's coming from
more towards the lower left than being
centered on the object itself. And these
are gamma rays with a billion times more
energy for every photon than the
ordinary visible light. So very uh
powerful emissions indeed. And it is
probably that cosmic ray particles
shooting out of the nebula are hitting
interstellar gas and creating showers of
highly energetic particles, pions and uh
other exotic particles being produced
which then decay and emit their energy
as gamma rays. And it's possible that
this is aligned with the spin axis of
the original progenitor um having shot a
jet out in this direction that's
creating this uh bubble of gamma ray
emissions.
So the question is what type of
supernova was this when it blew up?
Well, the light curve that we saw
earlier appears to be that of a type 1A
supernova. In other words, an exploding
white dwarf that has exceeded the
Chandra Seca mass limit and detonated in
a huge and completely destructive
um
uh ripping apart of the star. But not
everybody was in agreement about this
for a very long time. And of course to
some extent we're reliant on Tao's
observations of the light curve which
were made largely by eye and we didn't
quite catch the beginning. So it's a
little bit difficult to say. The
spectrum of the X-rays that were
released certainly seem to confirm that.
And we are talking about seeing elements
such as silicon, iron, magnesium,
sulfur, as well as calcium, oxygen, and
so on in the spectrum. And this
certainly seems to suggest that this was
the destruction of a carbon oxygenbased
white dwarf with a full thermonuclear
runaway creating those heavier elements.
But in 2008, the solution was probably
finally landed upon as it being a type
1A when a light echo was detected. So
the flash of the supernova had gone off
and the visible light had arrived here
in 1572,
but some of it had gone sideways for 400
years before bouncing off a uh shell of
material and coming back towards us. So,
we're seeing the delayed light echo, a
reflection from another object
where the light of the supernova
illuminated that object. It would have
to a certain extent imprinted the
spectrum of that object on it. But most
of the light just bounced back to us.
And we can see in the spectrum in the
visible light that uh we are dealing
with all the elements that you would
expect in the right proportions for it
to be a type 1A supernova. So that
rather puts that question to bed. But
most recently we have Tao G.
Now the G
refers to a labeling of a series of
stars that were nearby
and they were labeled A through V. But
the G star Tao G imaged there by the
Hubble Space Telescope Wide Field
Planetary Camera Mark 2 and labeled for
you
is a class G0
star. So slightly hotter than the sun.
200 hotter, one times the sun's mass.
So, pretty much like the sun, but
larger, somewhere between 1.3 and 2.6
times bigger, and certainly brighter,
two to 7 and a half times brighter.
Now, we're not exactly sure of those
numbers because the distance is a little
bit uncertain. GIA gave a range of 5,200
to 8,400
light years with the middle value around
6,800 being the most probable. Now, that
puts it closer to us than the nebula.
Uh, but these distance estimates and
indeed the estimate to the nebula may
not be absolutely right. So, um, it's
quite possible that Taiko G is a star in
and around the area where the supernova
went off. And there are a couple of
peculiar things about it. For a star
with one times the sun's mass, what's it
doing being slightly larger, a lot
brighter, and a little bit hotter? Well,
partly that's because it's older, aged
5.7 billion years, so around 1.2 billion
years older than the sun. And that
should result in it aging more quickly.
And uh sorry, in it um well, so I'll
start that sentence again. At one solar
mass, it should have aged at the same
rate. And so it would be a little older
than the sun and have a slightly higher
helium content through cooking up helium
in its core and be beginning to swell to
towards the giant phase,
but it's a bit hotter. And that's a bit
strange. You would expect the surface
temperature to go down um rather than go
up. Well, what's going on? Well, we
think that it probably was a binary
companion of the star that blew up, the
white dwarf that created the type 1A
supernova. And the reason that that type
1A supernova was able to detonate, was
that this Tao G companion was originally
two to three times the mass of the sun.
And as it aged, because at around 5.7
billion years and more massive than the
sun, it would age more quickly and reach
the giant stage, becoming a yellow
subgiant perhaps.
So, not getting all the way to a full
red giant, losing some of its mass then
as the outer layers swelled and fell
into the gravitational reach of the
white dwarf, passing that rush limit,
being pulled over into the accretion
disc
and falling onto the white dwarf,
boosting the white dwarf's mass up over
the 1.44 44 solar mass Chandra Seca
limit. And when that happens, that's
what triggers the detonation of the
white dwarf as a type 1A supernova.
And of course, this accounts for the
mass loss that has then occurred during
that cannibalization of Taiko G. It's
lost a significant portion of itself
over onto its companion, perhaps even
losing more mass through being so close
to the violent explosion.
And that has given it a kick. The
enormous detonation of the white dwarf
would have hit it with a shock wave,
possibly disrupted and stirred the
material. Maybe that's boosted the
temperature as well, and sent it moving
quite rapidly away from us, which we
certainly observe. We can measure the
Doppler shift. And of course, if the two
were in orbit around each other and
suddenly you take away by disrupting the
mass of the white dwarf and hurling it
in every direction, the uh angular
momentum of the companion star is
suddenly not held to any gravitational
well anymore and it will just fly off in
a straight line. So maybe those factors
have combined to create this rapid
movement away from us. So this is all
pointing to the history of the origin of
the Tao supernova of 1572.
And I said it was observed all over the
world. It was actually incredibly famous
and it gets referred to in many
different publications.
The ninth edition of James Joyce's
Ulyses
makes reference to the supernova and
associates its appearance with the
youthful William Shakespeare of the day.
Uh describing William Shakespeare as a
bit of a supernova in his own field.
A 1998 edition of Sky and Telescope
argued that the supernova is actually
described in Hamlet. And if you want to
look it up, it's uh Bernardo act one
scene one. That is the relevant place to
go and have a look. It's said to have
inspired Edgar Allan Poe's poem Al Araf
and also Arthur C. Clark's novel of
1955, the star mentions the supernova as
being a possible connection with the
star of Bethlehem. Now, I'm not quite
sure how he came to that conclusion, but
uh there is a number of people make that
sort of association that the star of
Bethlehem might have been a supernova,
but I'm afraid the dates 1500 years out,
so I don't quite understand why he made
that particular reference.
Anyway, thanks very much for listening.
That was once around Tao's supernova.